Good afternoon, dear colleagues. I am Oleg Evgenievich Boksansky, Professor of the Russian Economic Academy, MIPLEKHANOV.
I teach various components of MBA courses, management of personnel, management of human resources, management of organizations.
Today's topic is personnel training, more precisely, individual and organizational training.
If we consider the entire sector of personnel training, we can highlight several major blocks,
which are present in every large organization, in which there is a well-established and well-organized structure of personnel training.
First of all, it is, of course, selection of personnel.
Then it is about training and development of personnel.
This is a rather important piece, which is directly related to the prospects of development of employees in the company,
which is related to the personnel reserve, its creation, its construction,
which is related to the design of personnel trajectories of specialists working in the organization.
It is very close, together with training and development, there is a block of assessment and motivation of personnel.
Because when we try to build assessment criteria, competence criteria,
the prospects of development of a person, his personnel movement, vertical and horizontal rotation,
we must assess it and identify the motivation system.
Why is a person interested in working in an organization?
How can we ensure that a person works more actively, not formally, but approaches the case with interest
and, accordingly, makes a worthy contribution to the work of his company?
Therefore, the topic of training and development is, in fact, the key and central one,
when we consider different aspects of personnel functioning,
because, in fact, it is, on the one hand, a necessary continuation of the topic of selection of personnel.
When we take a person on vacation, we must, firstly, adapt him to the implementation of the functions that he performs,
and, secondly, teach him to perform these functions as it is customary in the company,
teach him to function in such a way that the return from the actions that he performs
is the most useful, the most effective, the most fruitful.
And, of course, only after we have invested the means of training and development of a person,
we can talk about evaluation and motivation, about the evaluation criteria,
what criteria can be studied from the point of view of grading,
what criteria can be studied from the point of view of performance indicators, and so on.
And, accordingly, depending on the training that we conduct,
we can talk about motivation, motivation related to the work of a person in the company,
to the return of a person in the company, and, accordingly, to the development of the career growth,
the career development of this person.
The topic of training is a rather extensive topic,
and, as you understand, during our meeting, we will not be able to consider it in detail,
to find out any nuances.
Our task is more modest.
To set the main positions, main directions, main goals that arise before the organization,
which wants to train its employees in order to achieve specific advantages
in the market in which other companies function,
and, accordingly, to win and develop its niche market,
which is associated with those actions, with that product, with those services that the company provides.
Naturally, if we are talking about training,
then what characteristics are usually used to characterize this process?
In order to highlight the main characteristics,
we will turn to the most frequently used criteria for training,
because it is from the analysis of these criteria that the degree of return of those investments,
which are invested in training, is assessed.
Indeed, perhaps, if we consider the entire range of work with the staff,
then a rather large amount of money is invested in training and development,
which is associated with the need to conclude agreements with providers,
to attract high-quality teachers so that they can share their experience,
can indicate and prevent possible mistakes,
and, naturally, such teachers who are already successful in the field in which the company operates
and in the field in which the teaching is conducted.
When we talk about business education, there is a very important difference with academic education.
When we come to study at the university,
then, accordingly, there is a curriculum,
and regardless of what subjects we like, what we want,
we must study this curriculum if we want to get a diploma.
This is academic education, and this is its plus and minus,
because academic education is really fundamental,
and it, in fact, prepares a person to be able to engage in different areas of activity,
which are defined by his specialty.
When we talk about business education and the teaching of business education,
the situation is fundamentally different.
Business education does not imply that I will invest in a person the knowledge that he should have received.
The problem arises with the fact that there is a specialist here,
and, accordingly, I need to improve the skills that he has,
to specify, to specialize the knowledge that he has,
because, naturally, if a specialist comes to work in a company,
he already has his own traditions, his own methods of approach to solving the tasks that will be faced by him,
and it is necessary to pass on these already developed skills, knowledge, methods.
Then they can be changed, then they can be modified,
but only then, in order not to invent a bicycle from scratch.
In this regard, business education is always practical.
I do not take a person who knows absolutely nothing,
and I do not prepare a person who I need from him.
If we work in a company, then, naturally, in the event of a vacancy,
we select those people who have the necessary level of preparation in order to meet this vacancy.
But, then the specifics begin.
The specifics of the company, the specifics of the market, the specifics of the product, the specifics of the services.
And in order for a person to get involved as quickly as possible in the most effective functioning,
he needs to pass on these specifics as quickly as possible.
These are the tasks that are solved by learning in business processes.
Therefore, in addition to this important distinction between academic education and business education,
the main criterion that testifies to the effectiveness of learning is the modification of the behavior of the employee.
Moreover, in this case, we are talking about the modification of professional behavior.
A person quickly acquires, refines those skills, those actions, those ways of seeing,
which he needs for the successful performance of the function that is assigned to him.
The faster this modification of behavior is carried out, the more successful the education.
Success here depends on two factors, the main two factors.
Naturally, there can be many factors.
The first is, of course, related to the speed of the formation of the necessary skills, the necessary ways of reacting.
And the second factor is related to the stability of these skills.
If I was prepared today and, accordingly, passed on those skills, but did not work well enough,
then these skills will fail, there will be a backlash, and I will still have to get the results that I need on my own mistakes, on my own experience.
If, for example, we made a mistake in the contract, which is entitled to a large amount, then the price of this mistake can be great.
That is why, when we talk about business education, the modification of behavior is the leading criterion that is considered here.
And I would like to draw your attention to the modification of professional behavior.
The modification of professional behavior implies corporate culture, but still, first of all,
it is those or other professional competencies that should be in the hands of the employee,
who occupies the appropriate position and fulfills those or other functional duties.
So, this is the first and, perhaps, one of the most global fundamental characteristics of education,
according to which the success of business education is assessed, is the modification of behavior, professional behavior.
But here, again, it is necessary to pay special attention to the fact that this modification of behavior,
the development of those or other ways of reacting, the development of those or other ways of functioning,
should be characterized by such a criterion as permanence.
There should not be any temporary results.
Today I use these results, tomorrow I do not use them, I forgot about them,
and if those or other circumstances change, I have to re-learn, remember, adjust to the previous skill.
Good learning should lead to automatism, and there is nothing wrong with that.
In this case, when we talk about business functioning, we are talking about the performance of certain functions,
certain tasks, and before we build those or other venture schemes, those or other creative solutions,
we must be sure that all the necessary aggregate of actions that we must perform will be performed automatically.
Only when we are sure that we will not stumble upon those or other daily routine operations,
only then can we talk about innovations, only then can we talk about something creative.
In fact, the situation is very simple.
You should not invent a bicycle.
In business, it is a waste of time and money, and the price here can be incompatible with the results that can be obtained.
Therefore, the permanence of the worked behavior, the worked professional competence,
is the second important criterion, which is related to the success of the modification of the behavior that has occurred.
The next thing to pay attention to, if we consider the characteristics of the success of learning,
is the understanding of the fact that changes in professional activity, changes in the professionalism of an employee
do not necessarily have to follow the experience of learning.
The fact is that if we have listened to the most wonderful training courses,
if we have worked out the most wonderful skills, these will still be new skills for us.
A person is simply so arranged that he often prefers to use already familiar, already worked out, already familiar schemes for him.
If I use something new, there is still some risk here.
What if it doesn't work?
What if the results I get are worse than what I can get?
And in the end, a person really does not like to give up on the usual ways of behavior.
Therefore, naturally, we learn in order to change our professional success.
But this does not mean that we will immediately change it.
It is necessary to create a suitable psychological climate,
it is necessary to have the appropriate management conditions,
it is necessary to have the appropriate support in order for me to really apply new experience,
new knowledge, new competencies, without being afraid to be ridiculed.
We are all different.
Someone learns something successfully and quickly.
Someone needs a long time to learn, but then he becomes an ace in performing certain actions.
And this long process is connected with careful study, analysis of certain events that may occur.
A person first examines, analyzes those or other actions inside himself,
analyzes possible risks that follow,
and only after I have already set up a certain cognitive scheme,
which we will talk about later today,
only after I have already calculated everything,
when I have already worked in advance in terms of what difficulties may arise,
and I have already created a program for overcoming these difficulties.
It is not necessary to arise, for my calmness it is necessary,
if something unusual happens, I should be ready for it.
Therefore, you do not need to dream of a magic wand and think that if we, as the company managers,
have invested large funds in training staff,
then when they come from training, our business performance will rise to the sky the next day.
No, it will not.
They will rise the next day.
They can rise in a week, in a month, in six months.
This is normal.
As practice and experience of foreign companies show,
in which the training system has been developing for almost two centuries,
the third is qualitative training.
This is not the kind of training that gives results immediately.
Qualitative training is the kind of training that modifies professional behavior
and gives a stable, constant result in connection with the newly acquired experience.
This is the third characteristic of training.
The next characteristic of training is that, in fact,
the experience of performing certain functions,
certain actions, the experience of interacting and communicating with employees,
the experience of management, the experience of management.
And at the same time, it should be borne in mind that this change in experience
comes from everyday practice.
We can read a huge number of really good books.
In the list of literature that will be offered to our course,
there are many books that have proven their demand, their applicability, their effectiveness.
But this is a description of someone's success,
a description of someone's luck,
a description of what happens in other companies,
in other conditions, in another business environment.
And this does not mean that if we try to apply the results
that have been published in these books one-to-one,
we will get the same results.
This is a very important stage, because it is often believed
that there are different providers, different business institutions,
different companies that are able to conduct the training
that they have recommended.
They have recommended themselves in some companies,
but we need to be prepared for the fact that we will not always
get the same results.
And here again, a subtle point.
There can be significant changes in the business environment,
there can be significant changes in the processes that surround us,
but, for example, these changes will not be enough to satisfy the management,
and the management will be dissatisfied.
So here again, there is a difference between objective and subjective characteristics.
Objectively, the indicators have really increased.
For example, the volume of sales increased by 10%,
and this is a good indicator if we take the market analysis.
But on the other hand, the management of the company is dissatisfied.
It invested funds to increase sales by 60%.
Here is a very important problem that arises with the gap
between the level of achievement and the level of compulsion.
Compulsions can be very high,
but these compulsions can be different from the real reality.
And accordingly, when we evaluate the results of the training,
when we evaluate the events that have occurred,
it is necessary to agree on the criteria
on which we will evaluate the results,
so that there is no disappointment,
so that there is no deception of hopes,
disappointed expectations,
so that the experience of a fairly successful training,
which is a successful training, is always an expensive training.
In principle, as the same experience shows,
cheap training never leads to results.
So, investments were made big,
and the expected results turned out to be less than we would like.
And in this situation, it is necessary to turn to the market analysis
and see if the results that are obtained are really so bad,
and to compare my expectations with the achievements that are really achieved.
And one more important criterion that we need to remember
when we consider the training.
No matter how good the experience is,
no matter what good skills we have received,
they always need to be strengthened.
This is what happens very often.
If a person has started to succeed,
if he has started to achieve the results that he did not achieve before,
he must experience the reinforcement of his success.
If this reinforcement does not exist,
then a person loses motivation for further work, for further functioning.
We will talk in detail about reinforcement,
about punishments and various sanctions that are usually applied in the business environment.
But for now, we need to pay attention to the fact that
the training will only bring results
if its consequences are reinforced.
If the results of this training will be strengthened,
motivated and stimulated,
the employee should...
People love praise, we are all living people,
and we should not be stingy with this praise.
If there is really something to praise for,
it is when a particular employee is active,
takes responsibility,
demonstrates willingness to work more,
and does not involve his or her functional responsibilities.
So, we have discussed five main criteria
that are used to analyze the success and effectiveness of the training.
To sum up,
if you open different books,
and the training is now devoted to a large number of literature,
not only domestic,
there is a huge number of translations of literature.
And the translations that are available now are books from the 60s, 70s, 80s.
As for the Russian specificity,
we are starting to implement the schemes
that were popular 10, 20, 30 years ago.
Now they have been abandoned,
or not, but we are taking the old,
classical schemes and making the same mistakes
that have been tested for a long time,
and that could have been prevented.
So, if we look at the literature,
usually these five criteria are the significant,
essential characteristics that can testify to the learning,
and in fact testify to the effectiveness of the return of the funds invested in the training.
We have already talked about the fact that the training is an expensive process.
And in this regard, the problem arises.
If I make investments,
will I be at a loss,
as the company's manager,
or will I achieve significant results from the point of view of market analytics?
Although, again, I would like to draw your attention to the fact
that there are different authors, different criteria,
but in principle, these five are the ones
that most of the recognized authorities agree on.
So, this is what concerns the characteristics of the learning process.
Now let's look at the different approaches
that exist in learning,
and, accordingly, we will analyze their advantages,
their advantages,
and what these approaches complement each other.
I want to say right away,
that at the moment,
in Russian education,
we have moved away from the old scheme, when we argued about which approach was better.
Who gives better results?
Behaviorists? Cognitivists?
Practitioners? Theorists?
Now, we have reached the understanding of a very simple point.
In business, different tasks arise.
Different problems arise before the business.
Business operates in different conditions, in different environments.
And, accordingly, if we want to solve a particular task,
we must take from the accumulated archive of tools
those tools that will be the most successful in solving the tasks that arise before us.
Therefore, we, looking at the theory,
the approaches that exist in learning,
we will look at them.
And I would like to make a point here,
that we have reached a fundamental understanding.
Not from the point of view of what the first, second, third was,
who replaced whom, and who was better, who was worse,
but from the point of view that each approach is tested for decades,
not just for decades.
A set of technologies, methods, concepts, solutions,
which turned out to be successful in their area of application.
And, accordingly, if we want to solve those tasks that arise
specifically before our company,
specifically before our partners,
specifically before our employees,
then we must choose from this abundance of tools
the one that will be the most successful.
From the point of view of investment, one,
from the point of view of success, two,
and from the point of view of the existence of the result, three.
Everything we talked about, we did not start with the criteria in vain.
And each of the approaches that we will consider
is just to evaluate, to analyze from the point of view of those criteria
that we talked about.
The first approach that is used in business learning
is the behavioral approach.
It is called differently, and we have already talked about it
when we were considering the methodology of business.
This approach is called behavioral, behaviorist.
It is important because it is no more than a copy
of the English behaviorist.
And, again, many approaches that we will consider today,
you are already familiar with them.
But today we will look at all these approaches
from a slightly different point of view.
From a different point of view, from the point of view of the tool
that it gives us.
Earlier we talked about the punitive structure,
the basic positions, methodologies, ways of application.
Today we will talk about the tools that are in each approach
and which are used to solve those or other tasks
that arise directly when building a process of learning,
a process of learning an employee, when building a learning organization.
The behavioral approach in the business direction
is closely related to Skinner.
If we talk about the originator of behaviorism,
it is John Watson, who introduced the concept of behaviorism
and gave the requirements that were then developed,
systematized and applied.
As for Barris Skinner,
he, based on the developed methods,
developed approaches,
created a very extensive tool for influencing behavior.
As for Skinner,
he actually highlighted a new type of behavior
that was not considered in psychology and science before.
This is so-called operant behavior.
What is it?
Since our task is to analyze the practical application,
we will not go into details,
the main thing is that we have an understanding.
There are two types of behavior.
This is respondent behavior and operant behavior.
As for respondent behavior,
it is a well-known Pavlovian term,
conditional reflexes.
Skinner calls this type of training S,
to emphasize the importance of stimulus.
This is a stimulus training.
S stands for the word stimulus.
Accordingly, there is an old good tradition of behaviorism.
There are external stimuli that affect the human body.
There is a reaction of a person to these stimuli.
Stimulus and reaction are respondent behaviors.
It exists, it was perfectly considered by Pavlov.
Skinner actually believed that after Pavlov,
there was nothing else to do in respondent behavior.
He discovered everything that was necessary.
As for Skinner, he was a practitioner.
The main thing for him was to get a practical result.
This is what is characteristic of all behaviorism.
In this regard, he was quite cool about theory.
Because theory is our idea of ​​the scheme.
Skinner was a behaviorist.
He was not interested in what was in our heads.
He was interested in the results we achieve.
He was interested in the behavior of a person.
We will not get into the head.
Because this is a very subjective thing.
But we will always see what a person does,
how successful he is at it,
what he succeeds and what he fails.
We can study behavior objectively.
Therefore, let's study it.
But we will leave everything that is in the head to the psychologist.
This was the idea that Skinner fully supported.
As for Pavlov's respondent training,
this is a training that really exists.
It is inherent in both humans, animals, rats, mice, and worms.
The main thing is to have a nervous system.
If there is a nervous system that reacts to stimuli from the outside world,
it gives a certain reaction.
Accordingly, after the stimulus is exerted, there is a certain reaction.
But Skinner thought about the fact that human behavior,
I draw your attention again, is about behavior,
not about the psyche, not about thinking.
This will be a lot of cognitive approach.
What we will consider further after Skinner.
Skinner was based on the fact that a person behaves somehow.
A person does something.
Is there a difference in human behavior from animal behavior?
Since for Skinner as a behaviorist,
this entire inner psychological life was uninteresting,
he did not deny it, he just did not deal with it.
Accordingly, Skinner drew attention to the fact that
a person, like other higher animals,
does not only react to external stimuli.
A person has a certain behavior.
What does this behavior do?
What does a person do?
What does an animal do?
We do it to get some kind of reactions,
because these reactions give certain consequences.
Either the consequences are positive for the body,
we went there, found food,
we did a job, got a material reward,
we took the initiative, we were scolded.
Accordingly, human behavior leads to various consequences.
And then a person looks at these consequences.
If these consequences are positive for a person,
then Skinner says that this human behavior
that leads to the consequences that suit a person,
is behavior with reinforcement.
I am satisfied with the result.
Therefore, I build a certain line of behavior
in order to then get a certain result.
I know that to get a result,
you need to take a certain number of steps.
It can be long, it can be short.
This sequence of steps can be complex,
it can be simple.
It can trigger different reactions,
different schemes of behavior,
different behavior programs.
This term, by the way, is Skinner's,
because Skinner, as we have already discussed,
considering the methodology of organizational behavior,
introduced the concept of programmed learning.
So, Skinner said that human behavior
is a certain program that he implements.
And therefore, this program has the consequences
of behavior that leads to the consequences that suit me.
And, accordingly, if I want to get these consequences,
then these consequences reinforce my behavior.
And there are consequences that do not suit me.
That is, if I do something,
I will get an undesirable result.
If I am constantly late for work, I will be fired.
If I want to be fired,
then I will be late and I will be fired,
and it is the fault of the management.
So, they fired me.
If I do not want to be fired,
I must change my behavior
in order not to get an undesirable result.
Consequently, it will be an abomination of undesirable behavior.
Or a punishment.
Skinner, and we will talk about this a little later,
considers not only reinforcement, but also punishment.
Reinforcement contributes to behavior,
but punishment, on the contrary,
stops any behavior.
Therefore, Skinner introduces a new concept of behavior,
operant behavior.
Or he calls it a behavior
conditioned on the type R,
the type of reaction.
That is, it is not important here the stimulus that affected me,
but the reaction that I will get
if I implement a program of any behavior.
If this reaction suits me,
it reinforces my behavior.
If it does not suit me,
it leads to an abomination of undesirable behavior.
If a child goes to school
and, accordingly,
he is encouraged for good grades,
for additional tasks that he does,
he likes to study.
If a child is forced to go to school,
which he does not want,
then, accordingly,
the unfortunate 11 years that we spend in school
because we do not do what we need,
but we are forced to do,
this is a so-called negative reinforcement,
or an aversive one.
And a little later we will talk about this.
As for behaviorism and the learning process,
Skinner not only introduced
such a type of learning as operative behavior,
based on the expected consequences,
but also paid a lot of attention to the analysis of
the existing modes of reinforcement and punishment,
the existing modes of assistance
in the development of one or another behavior,
such as accuracy, scrupulosity,
responsibility, pedanticity,
accurate implementation of bureaucratic frameworks.
And what are the ways that will allow us
to prevent the manifestation of undesirable behavior?
Delay,
lack of interest in work,
sitting at work,
unwillingness to work,
formal attitude to work, and so on.
That is, all those problems that arise in any person
in his daily work,
because work takes up most of our life,
perhaps even more than sleep.
So, what types,
what modes of reinforcement does Skinner give?
This is very important,
because Skinner was essentially an operationalist.
All his work, all his achievements,
they are so good that the structure of the operation
that must be performed is always prescribed
in order to get the desired result.
Despite all the abundance of possible modes of reinforcement,
you can see two main types.
One type of reinforcement is related to time.
After I have made a certain reaction,
a certain consequence occurs,
and accordingly, it is necessary to wait a certain time
for this consequence to occur.
If, after this time,
the consequence does not occur,
then the behavior is not reinforced.
If, after a certain time,
a certain consequence occurs,
then the behavior is reinforced and fixed.
This is the so-called temporary reinforcement,
when the criterion is time.
After a certain reaction is made,
it takes some time for any event to occur.
And the second type of reinforcement,
the so-called proportional reinforcement,
is when a certain reaction is made,
and a certain number of consequences must occur after it.
For example, if I do not be late for work,
but I come on time,
it will mean that I will be set an example to others,
I will be on a good score,
I will be awarded with prizes for the performance discipline,
I will be given a notice for further personnel promotion,
and so on.
So, the reaction is one, I come on time.
But there can be several consequences of this reaction.
This is proportional reinforcement.
Again, this is a very important point,
because it is connected with the necessary amount of effort
that must be applied to a person
in order to achieve the desired result in an operant way,
in a behavioral way.
When we talk about motivation,
this is a direct example.
We have increased the salary.
Is this enough to increase the efficiency of our employees?
Or not?
How much should we increase the salary?
Should the whole team be increased?
Should we introduce a system of fines?
Should we introduce a progressive scale
or a premium scale?
These are numerous questions
that are connected with a certain amount of reactions
to the same behavioral action.
Why do we spend so much time on reinforcement?
All these types of reinforcement,
both temporal and proportional,
are directly connected with our business behavior.
Behavior during negotiations,
successful negotiations,
behavior in communication,
psychological climate in the team.
All this is a behavior of a person.
And depending on the reinforcement that we receive,
a certain behavior is formed,
certain reactions are formed,
certain ways of communication are formed.
People in the team,
subordinates and managers,
managers of the same level,
that is, the horizontal and vertical levels.
Of course, Skinner, as we have already said,
was not limited only to reinforcements.
Skinner understood perfectly
that behaviorists are generally based on experience.
These are people who work with common sense.
Why do behaviorists have a lot of results?
Behaviorists observe events,
observe the facts that happen in our everyday life
and try to justify these facts,
to highlight from them any components
that we need to improve
or that we need to get rid of.
If we talk about improvement,
it is reinforcement.
But, of course, there are a huge number of behavioral reactions
that we would like to get rid of.
I'm not talking about smoking,
alcohol consumption,
we are talking about the business environment.
For example, we need to get rid of
negligent attitude to work,
from being late,
from the rays that occur in employees,
from very long lunches,
from long absence at work,
from frequent overdoses.
Any of you will give a lot of examples
of those or other poetic reactions
that do not please employees.
We will not consider the question
whether these reactions are really bad,
whether they really need to be changed.
We assume that there is a leader
and there are his subordinates.
The leader is not satisfied with something
and he wants his displeasing behavior
to be changed.
Skinner says that all this can be achieved
by means of punishment.
Speaking of punishment,
Skinner uses the term
of an aversive stimulus.
Aversive is unpleasant, painful.
If reinforcement is what we want,
then aversion is what we do not want.
We do not want to be stabbed,
we do not want to be cold,
we do not want to be deprived of bonuses,
we do not want to be constantly reworked.
All these aversive stimuli
work on a person,
they constantly function on a person.
Any of us will say that
there is something he wants
and there is something he does not want
but he has to make up with.
These are aversive stimuli.
As for these stimuli,
Skinner proposes the idea
of an aversive control
or control of unpleasant,
unacceptable stimuli.
This control is, from his point of view,
punishment and negative reinforcement.
As for punishment,
it is a kind of a combination
of the influence on a person
that is aimed at the development
of the desired behavior.
If you are late for work,
I can first make a comment to you.
This is a comment,
this is a punishment.
Moreover, it will be a positive punishment
for Skinner, because in this case
I am achieving the desired behavior.
A person may not like it,
he wants to sleep,
he does not want to go to work at all,
but there are certain behavior rules,
there are certain behavior conditions
in the environment,
in my business environment where I am.
Therefore, you must obey these rules.
I made a comment to you,
you are late again,
I made a complaint to you,
I am depriving you of a bonus,
you are late again,
I am depriving you of a bonus.
You don't need to jump right away.
You don't need to fire right away.
A person has his own desires,
his own needs,
his own ways of reacting.
And he should bring them
in accordance with those
that are adopted in that environment,
in that company,
where he works.
The meaning of a positive punishment
is the cessation of
undesirable behavior.
In fact, this is the most negative
reinforcement of what we are talking about.
Well, it cannot be said
that this is an undesirable form of control.
Maybe, from our point of view,
when this punishment is applied
to us from the boss's side,
this is bad.
But remember how we behave with children.
If a child runs across the street
on the street,
he will be punished.
But if a child runs across the street
on the street,
he will be punished.
If a child runs across the street
on the street,
we punish him.
For his own good,
he should remember
that he is on the street
and that you should cross it
for your own safety
on the green light.
If a child runs across the street
in front of a nearby vehicle,
we will punish him too
because he is in danger.
He does not yet understand
how our goal
is to get a positive reinforcement.
We can encourage him
to cross the street
on the green light.
But still,
this behavior,
the same street,
is a result of the conditions
that are quite extreme.
We do not have time
for a long-term reinforcement.
We need to create a quick reaction.
This is why the punishment is applied.
But,
in addition to a positive punishment,
the goal is to
ensure a person's safety.
The goal is to
try to create
the necessary skills
for him to function
at his workplace.
There is a negative punishment.
The goal is
to eliminate
any stimulus
that causes
this behavior.
The goal is
to create
a positive reinforcement.
This is a punishment
for the wrong behavior.
We all know
that it is not good
to deceive,
but we deceive.
We all know
that if you promised
to do something
at a certain time,
you should do it.
But you do not.
There are many reasons
that are more important
than the punishment.
The negative punishment
is to cut
off
unwanted behavior.
The negative punishment
is to fire you.
is
to not give recommendations
to the employee
who left you
because he was
incompetent
and had
negative personal qualities.
This is a negative punishment.
The employee
did something wrong,
gave the documents to the competitors,
made constant conflicts
inside the team,
violated the psychological
limits of the team.
In fact,
we are punishing
not to change
the behavior,
as in a positive case,
but to get rid
of the employee
who is not
doing his job.
In this case,
we are talking
about the elimination,
stopping,
copying of the behavior
that does not suit us.
As for the negative behavior,
its goal is to limit
the aggressive stimuli
that this behavior
causes and
to limit the behavior
that is not needed.
When we talk
about the motivation system,
the punishment system
also has a significant
meaning.
On the one hand,
fines can be a positive punishment
if it is adequate
to the action.
If its goal
is that
other ways of
influencing the employee
are not
promising,
then the question arises
about the person's
responsibility.
But the same fines
can be negative.
A person can be late
for work
for a reason.
A child is sick,
a car is broken,
in the end,
he left work late yesterday
to perform certain actions,
and he is not
responsible for the actions
that he did.
If this action
is not punishable
according to the motives
that were used,
then we kill the initiative
of the employee.
Then we force
the employee
to change his attitude
and move from
informal attitude
to formal attitude.
We do not step
to the right or left.
When we talk about punishment,
it should be differentiated.
It can kill the initiative
and make
the risk
that I have
more accurate.
This is
what the punishment
system is about.
We have already
talked about
the fact that
the punishment
is aimed at
the development,
support,
and strengthening
of the desired behavior.
There is a punishment
aimed at
eliminating
the behavior
that is not needed.
Skinner
found a very good
and detailed study
of these processes
and found
that the perpetrator
and he himself
had a significant influence
on the formation
of different business models.
This is how
we can characterize
the behavioral approach,
define and indicate
the direction of its development,
applicability,
and importance,
where it is effective,
and effective quickly.
These are the characteristics,
the ways of influencing
our behavior,
which often allow
to come
and get
quick results.
I don't think
that a person should
constantly lose bonuses
in order to realize
that he is doing something wrong.
If a person continues
to do something wrong,
then it is worth thinking
about the task
that is put before him.
The advantage of the behavioral approach
is its speed.
All the trainings
based on the behavioral approach,
all the methods of learning
formulated here,
are characterized by
the fact that these are
quick and stable results.
But as for the behavioral learning,
there is a significant minus.
This minus is
in the specifics
of the behavior.
Skinner was an operationalist,
as I have already said.
He produced a specific reaction
to a specific stimulus.
Has this stimulus changed?
Has a company
moved from one office
to another?
People got used
to one office.
They knew where
and who was located,
where and what was done,
and their behavior skills
were brought to
the level of automaticity
in this particular office.
They knew where to put
a specific document,
how to put
a signature on a document.
They got used to it.
If a company moved
from one office to another,
it was simply because
it was a new office,
it had a different layout,
and it was the same
established system.
They needed to adapt
to it again.
In this sense,
both the plus and minus
of the behavioral approach
are present.
It is situational,
it brings all actions
to the level of automaticity.
But if external circumstances
change in the behavioral approach,
as I have already said,
the external circumstances
change,
we need the same behavior.
Behavior requires something else.
Circumstances change.
Therefore,
any external excuse
necessarily leads
to a change in behavior,
to a change in the operational
conditions that were there,
to a change in the automatisms
that exist.
A person, as we have already
said, is so organized
that he always strives
to adhere to what he already
knows, what has already
justified itself.
And in this regard,
any new thing for him,
not that it is undesirable,
in order to change
something,
you need to make an effort.
It is always easier for me
to return to what I already
know, it is always easier for me
to return to what has already
proven its effectiveness or
ineffectiveness.
How to get rid of
telebolic problems?
All accountants know that
they submit half-yearly
and annual reports
twice a year.
And, accordingly,
a month before that,
they sit and count everything
until late.
This is a well-known thing.
If we,
as always,
did not postpone all the necessary
actions, all the papers,
and, finally,
the preparation of quarterly,
half-yearly,
annual reports,
we would do everything
as it should be done,
we would not have to sit
for a month without leaving the papers.
Everyone knows this,
but it still happens.
This is a habit,
and, accordingly,
if we say that it is a quarterly
or annual report,
it is obvious to everyone
that it is not always positive.
But it is a habit,
and it is almost everywhere.
As you can see,
the behavioral approach,
on the one hand,
is very successful
in terms of speed,
but, on the other hand,
it is rigid and tough.
If something needs to be changed,
we need to restart the scheme
for the same reaction
of either operant or
component training.
This is natural.
Theoreticians and practitioners
thought about it.
Is it possible to somehow
facilitate this process?
The supporters of Skinner
did a huge number of experiments,
collected data,
analyzed it,
but, still,
the very original scheme,
the original scheme of behaviorism,
the stimulus, the reaction,
what you can see on the slide,
was the basic scheme
that operated in behaviorism
until the 50s,
60s of the last century.
Behaviorists,
I remind you,
came from the fact
that we can observe behavior,
behavior is an objective thing.
I can mention
the time you spend
on a particular action,
I can see
the speed of your actions,
the direction
you are going,
where you are shifting something,
and assess what you are doing successfully,
what is not successful,
develop the desired
ways of behavior,
teach you by them,
and, accordingly,
if you do not look for
the paper you always need
in the depths of your table,
where you have a huge mess,
but you spend a day
to sort out your table,
and then put all these papers
in order,
you will not look for them,
you will know where the necessary
paper is.
That is the stimulus, the reaction.
All this can be done.
And, again,
as I have already pointed out,
behaviorists
did not address
the person,
the psyche of the person.
There is behavior,
there is tone,
which can be seen objectively.
In the mid-50s,
behaviorists,
again, we have only talked about behaviorists,
we have thought about
that, in principle,
the scheme of stimulus and reaction
has already been developed,
and, indeed,
after Skinner's work,
it has been examined,
analyzed from all sides.
But in the mid-50s,
in the middle of the last century,
a different question arose.
All the experiments,
which behaviorists do,
were experiments on animals.
The same behaviorists,
I emphasize, behaviorists,
that is, supporters of the behavioral approach,
have thought about it.
Well, good.
Still,
I would like to turn to practice
and draw attention to the obvious fact
that in addition to external stimuli,
which act on a person
from the environment,
no matter how they act,
respondent stimulus-reaction,
or operant stimulus-reaction,
and I, according to its consequences,
assess how I should behave,
a person still has
an inner world.
Here is some kind of cognitive,
cognitive,
cognitive processes.
Still,
we cannot assume
that these processes
have no effect
on human behavior.
Skinner, by the way,
did not think so either.
Skinner, according to Osler,
assumed that we cannot get into a person
and study scientifically objectively the psyche.
So let's study objectively what we can.
Behavior.
When we get to the psyche,
so that we can study it objectively,
measure it,
assess it,
indicate it,
then we will study it
using scientific methods.
The ideal for behaviorists
has always been the accuracy of consciousness,
physics.
No matter what you know,
no matter what you don't know,
if you conduct any physical experiment,
and you conduct it
with the same initial data,
you will always get
the same result.
If you didn't get the same result,
then you made a mistake somewhere.
And you need to find this mistake.
Behaviorists liked this very much.
No matter what,
there is an incentive,
there is a reaction.
However,
in the middle of the last century
it became necessary
for the same behaviorists
to address
the human psyche.
And a paradoxical direction
arises.
Cognitive-behavioral.
It seems to be an incompatible function.
Behaviorist of behavior,
cognition,
is the psyche.
And here the negative behaviorist
of the psyche
is connected.
And accordingly,
a direction appears
that tries to measure
our cognitive moments
by behavioral methods.
And what is introduced
is the so-called internal variables.
What you see on the slide.
External stimuli
affect
a person,
a monkey,
a higher animal.
In this case, behaviorists
consider the higher animals
which have a certain
psychological way of processing reality.
Stimuli affect this psyche.
And then from this psyche,
depending on
the processing of this stimulus,
a reaction appears.
So,
the stimulus,
the internal variables,
they got the name
of the cognitive map
after Tolman.
And only then the reaction.
Behavior.
The difference...
What is the difference from the previous scheme?
The difference is fundamental.
Before, we change only the stimuli
and get behavior.
There was a purely mechanical scheme.
I increased the power of the stimulus,
I decreased the power of the stimulus,
I added, increased,
I got an increase,
a decrease in the reaction.
Direct proportionality,
direct opposite.
Now the situation changes.
There are stimuli,
all the same,
the most objective stimuli.
They affect the human psyche.
And the psyche is different for everyone.
We have different experiences,
we have different coordination.
And these stimuli
affect
the psyche
of an animal.
And already depending on
how this psyche
evaluates these stimuli,
depending on its experience,
depending on its memory,
depending on its attention,
depending on how these stimuli were used,
depending on those
psychological images
that the person had,
depending on the human thinking,
I will have
a certain reaction.
The simplest example is
an experienced manager
and a beginner.
They get
the same initial data.
But if a beginner
starts acting
according to the general patterns
that he was taught,
then the experienced manager
already knows
where something will work,
where something will not work.
The experienced manager already knows
pointless ways
that will not lead to
the desired result.
And accordingly,
he saves time
by not doing these actions.
Therefore,
he will achieve the result
incomparably faster than a beginner.
And since he achieved the result quickly,
he has a certain
time to do
certain sales,
to provide certain services
during a certain time interval.
This is what the inner variables have.
In fact, this is an experience,
the experience that is acquired
by an animal and a human
based on the fact
that they take part
in different kinds of actions,
different kinds of events.
When an animal
is not a human,
it is a human.
When we talk about
the cognitive behavioral direction,
it is primarily associated
with Albert Bandura
and Julian Rotter.
Of course, there were other researchers,
but since our task
is to get acquainted
with the main,
key directions,
the key figures here
are these two figures,
Bandura and Rotter.
As for Albert Bandura,
his basic idea
that he implemented
was that
he proposed
to build,
to analyze
learning from the point of view
of observation.
What does a person do?
What does a child do?
What does a long-sighted manager
who came to work do?
He starts to look
at the behavior of other people
who do not have
similar functions,
who perform
similar actions,
and tries to
record
the key elements
of their behavior
that make them successful.
If I have recorded
these elements of behavior,
then I start
to reproduce
this behavior.
And if I have modeled
the behavior
of a person
in a way
that I can
do it,
then I can
achieve the desired result.
If I have missed
some elements,
then I can
achieve the desired result,
but not so fast,
not so good,
or I will be disappointed
and will consider
that what I do
is inappropriate
for community
and the society.
If I have
demonstrated
a poor skill
to someone
then I'm
not a good person.
If I have
done
my best
for my country,
my community,
this black box
starts to behave.
It's a passive object
with an external influence
and reaction.
Bandoora makes a completely different situation.
Bandoora from a human
makes an active,
acting being.
Because
these inner variables
these cognitive maps
are my observations.
I'm stimulated.
I activate my memory.
I activate my existing experience.
I activate my systematic observation.
And I try to get the desired result.
If I don't get the result
or if I don't get the result
that I want
then I myself
without changing my behavior
I'm not a human being.
I'm a black box.
I try to change the external interference.
I'm trying
to build a different model.
If I can't change it
Iasons the options.
But the stimuli
doesn't change.
A monthus plan before me.
And how going to implement it
is my choice.
There is only one reaction.
The plan is here.
I got it in the first...
in the next month.
I have to take account in implementing the plans.
The reaction is the same.
But the achievement of the reaction
can be different.
And here
my internal variables
are
that I
take
those
behavior models
that will allow me
to get
the desired result
more successfully.
Increase it
in the same stimuli
to be more successful.
And then build
the desire
about the career growth,
material stimulation,
non-material stimulation
and so on.
The main
advantage of behaviorism
is the operationalism.
It's not enough to say
just observe and build the models.
It's not enough.
The success of behaviorism
as we have already mentioned
about Skinner
is that
he develops the specifics,
develops the operating system.
And Bandura
is famous not only for the fact
that he came up with the idea
of learning by observing and modeling
the successful behavior.
A very productive idea
that has found a great application
and we will talk about it today.
But Bandura
built the operating system,
built the variable system
that described
how to learn successfully,
how to organize the learning
successfully by observing.
As for behaviorism,
the scheme is different in simplicity.
It's also a plus of the behavioral approach.
They build very complex
multilayered schemes
that are difficult to understand.
And that's what modern
cognitivists often fail.
They have very beautiful schemes
that take up
huge sheets of Watman
and to understand something
you need to make a lot of effort.
The schemes of behaviorists
are simple,
they are clear,
they correspond to common sense.
Bandura divides only four variables
that will influence
the observation.
And these variables
are, let's say,
understandable to common sense.
These are the variables
that any living being
and human and animal face.
The first of these variables
is attention.
Every human,
every animal
has such a mental function
as attention.
Out of all the abundance of stimuli,
out of all the abundance of events
that exist in the world
that I live in,
that affect me,
based on my experience,
based on the power of stimuli,
I focus my attention
only on a certain number of events.
We said that
a person
can consciously
work only
with a measured number,
7 plus or minus 2
is 7.
And this is a very good thing.
So, we can
simultaneously
consciously
focus our attention
on 5 to 9 objects.
If we have more than 9 objects,
then our attention
is dispersed
and we miss something
in the sphere of attention.
This is how a person works.
It is pointless to talk about
the importance of attention
here.
It is academic debate.
If you are interested,
you can read
the books
that are recommended to you.
There are possible hypotheses
of such a process.
From the point of view of practice,
we are interested
in the problem
that a person is
evolutionarily
organized
and has a certain
mental state.
Our brain
can consciously
focus our attention
on 5 to 9 objects.
Someone has 6,
someone has 7.
This is normal.
This does not mean
that we can see only up to 9 objects.
We can see more objects,
but if we pay attention
to other objects,
we do it because
the previous events
are not in the sphere of our attention.
Therefore,
when I observe,
I should know
why I observe.
This is the first factor of success.
If I can identify
significant factors of observation,
then,
in this case,
I really
am able
to build
an adequate model.
I know
why I observe.
And, accordingly,
I know what to model.
You can model a hairstyle,
you can model shoes,
you can model a watch,
you can model glasses,
you can model a handkerchief
in your pocket.
Of course,
the appearance
has a significant influence,
but this is not always
the principled
way
of working.
We should be able
to build
a model
that is
effective
and professional.
If we focus
on the appearance,
we cannot pay attention
to the phone calls
that are made,
to the e-mails
that are written,
to the methods of work
that are used
to make
a plan.
We only pay attention
to the suit,
tie,
shoes,
and so on.
We have focused
our attention
on insignificant
signs.
We can dress up
as we want.
We can be dressed up
as a model,
a movie star,
an artist,
but we won't become
neither Banderas
nor Angelina Jolie.
So, this is attention.
The second
important factor
that we need
to build
a successful model
as a result of observation
is the preservation
of the memory.
As for our memory,
there are arguments
about the limited
memory,
but we don't care about
these arguments.
Any of us knows
that we can't always
remember what we need
at the moment.
In this situation,
there is a problem
that is related
to the need
to remember.
A person
remembers a lot
of facts
and events during his life.
But it's not enough
to remember.
You need to have
access to these events.
Many of you remember
that when we were
in our wonderful
student years,
we took out
all the information
we needed.
It's the same here.
We can be called
to the head
to get a report
on what we did
during the week.
Many companies
have a weekly report
on their actions.
We are called
to do something else.
We think about
the same business plan
but we don't remember
what we did.
The head
gets the impression
that I'm a lazybones
and that I'm
too materialistic
and too perspective.
Then we leave
and think
why didn't I
say this or that
and I won't
come back.
The problem
is not to remember
but to remember
what you need
in the right moment
in the right time
in the right conditions.
In other words,
if I
face the same situation
where I'm
successful
in my business
and I'm successful
in my career
in my business
I need to remember
his behavior
in similar situations
not in the way
he talks to his boss
or how he dresses
or how he flirts
or flirts.
But there are
other processes
that come to mind.
Therefore,
in order to
remember and have access
to those events
to those tasks
that arise
in a successful model
that I model
in solving the same tasks
that are in front of me.
The third component
that Bandura highlights
in his approach
to learning
through observation
is
motor processes
and motor-reproductive processes.
In fact,
despite the
complicated name
it's a very simple thing.
I see
I remember
I focused my attention
on the behavior of the model.
I can draw it.
But
several conditions have changed.
I need to be able
to apply
to remember
the behavior of the model
in such a way
that it corresponds
to the changed conditions
that exist.
Again,
it's a very simple situation.
We can observe
how a successful manager
gives instructions
to other managers
that are subordinate to him.
How does he organize their work?
If we
start giving instructions
to other managers
instead of him
in the absence of a manager
I think
we will get
a not so clear reaction
because our status
does not correspond
to our behavior.
He can lead
because other managers
are in the same position.
He is authoritative.
He knows
what to do
and how to do it.
His status
corresponds to his behavior.
Ours does not.
If we just
reproduce
a certain behavior
and monkey it
not because we want to
but because we see
how a person interacts
with others
and we think
that if we behave
we will get
the same results.
That's right.
We can reproduce
gestures,
facial expressions,
even voice parodies
but
we have different statuses.
That's why
a mirrored motor
reproductive process
in our performance
is more valuable
than the natural processes
that come from
a status manager.
By the way,
it's obvious
but remember
how often
you had to see
such reactions
and how often
it was funny
because you understood
why a person does it
and what it leads to
and what it doesn't.
And finally
the fourth
characteristic
of the observation
is the motivational processes.
A person's motivation.
And here
we should say
that Bandura
in this point
is far from
traditional behavioral approaches.
Behaviorists
don't consider
motivational processes.
Motivation is the reason
for a person's behavior.
So, the behaviorists
had a simple motivation.
The stimulus-reaction
is the motivation
that makes a person
do what he does.
That's all.
There was a clear motivation.
A person
was affected
by external factors.
I was asked to report.
I had to report
on my expenses
and I did
the right thing.
That's the motivation.
Bandura
talks about motivation
in the psychological sense of the word.
A person has
internal variables
and a person's motivation
is not only
connected with external stimuli.
Here Bandura
talks about
objectivity.
External stimuli are active.
But
how I will react,
what will be the real reasons
for my behavior
are determined by my internal
cognitive map,
my internal variables.
That's the I
in the scheme
that concerns
the cognitive behavioral approaches.
And, therefore,
there is a punishment.
But,
and this is the main difference
with Skinner
or radical behaviorism.
If the punishment
for Skinner
was the punishment
and reinforcement from the outside,
Bandura talks about
self-reinforcement
and self-punishment
and self-regulation.
A person
is interested in
animals.
Bandura was a behaviorist,
so he didn't deal
with one person.
He was interested in the whole
psychological range.
A person becomes an active being
and the reason for his behavior
is not in the outside.
The outside is an external factor.
It is inside a person.
This was the most fundamental
departure from behaviorism.
And here it is clear
that in the cognitive behavioral approach
all the cognitive
and motivational processes
are launched.
And now, in order to understand
how and why a person acts,
we need to address
his motives,
emotions,
desires, needs.
Although, of course,
Bandura in this case
also does not depart from behaviorism.
We should address them
in order to reinforce
the desired operant behavior.
I behave in order to get
the desired results for me.
Depending on the results
I get,
I modify my behavior.
But I do it.
I, a person,
become active.
And now
the spectrum,
the center of a person's behavior
is transferred from the outside to the inside.
This was really
a kind of
a return to behaviorism
of the inner world of a person.
This is what
led to
the elimination
of behaviorism
and to the beginning
of Watson's behaviorism.
But Bandura, again,
tries to make
these motivational processes
tangible,
visible,
and perceptible.
At the same time,
just like Skinner,
he does not stop
at the selection of
these components
and introduces
the concept of indirect reinforcement
and such an important factor
as self-effectiveness.
The ineffectiveness
of a person's behavior
is a very important factor.
The ineffectiveness of a person's behavior,
which we see from the outside,
is the assessment of
the effectiveness
of one's own behavior.
Again,
no one else assesses
how effective you are,
which is typical for behaviorism.
But a person himself assesses
how effective he is
and how to increase
his effectiveness.
A person punishes himself
if he fails
and he reinforces himself
if he has succeeded.
As for
indirect reinforcement,
in fact,
indirect reinforcement
is an observation
of the behavior of the model.
Let's recall Skinner's reinforcement.
It was necessarily external.
There is an external stimulus,
I behave,
and my reinforcement
is the result
of my achievement.
If I get
the desired result,
it is a reinforcement
of the desired behavior.
Bandura has a different situation.
I look at the behavior of the model
and I see
that in some situations
the model is more successful
than in others.
Some actions
of the model
are more successful
than others.
And I begin to realize
from the entire model behavior
these successful forms of behavior.
I reinforce myself
by observing the model.
I haven't done anything yet.
I mean,
I don't have a result yet
with its consequences
in order to reinforce my behavior.
I see that if the model
did such and such actions,
it got the desired result
with the desired consequences.
I begin to reinforce
not by my behavior,
but only by observing
the behavior of the model.
This is indirect reinforcement.
Not directly, but indirectly.
This is not my behavior,
this is the behavior of the model,
and I only observe its success.
And then I try to reproduce it.
I don't know yet if I will succeed.
I can copy the model
one by one
with the suit, glasses,
hairstyle, and so on,
and remain unsuccessful.
But this indirect reinforcement
will later require
real reinforcement
from my results.
But first, these are the results
that I see in the model.
And then
my successes
will be reflected
from the point of view
of my own assessment
of the effectiveness
of my behavior.
I do not assess my experiences.
This is not present
in the cognitive behavioral approach.
I, again, assess the result
of my behavior.
But I do it myself
by the reinforcement,
as we talked about.
Moreover, again,
the reinforcement highlights
four fundamental elements
that allow
to increase
the effectiveness of a person,
that is, to increase
his own opinion
about himself.
This has not yet been in behaviorism.
A person begins
to assess himself.
And from the point of view of Bandura,
a person can assess himself
objectively,
not passionately,
we all know that we are the best,
but objectively,
we are the worst.
If he really will come from
four criteria,
which Bandura highlighted.
The first criterion is
the ability of a person
to build
observable behavior.
There is a model,
I highlighted it with attention,
I kept its behavior in my memory,
but now I need
to reproduce this work.
Everyone gets it in different ways.
Someone
parodies Pugachev,
Kabzon,
but nevertheless he does not become
Pugachev or Kabzon,
he becomes a parodist.
In this regard,
again, how effective behavior
I will build
to be not a parodist,
but a specialist,
who will be appreciated
no less than the model
I am focused on.
The second criterion
of the most effective
is the presence of
indirect experience.
Not indirect reinforcement,
but indirect experience.
Indirect experience is
not directly related
to my behavior,
but it is a
coexisting experience.
There is a basic experience
that I get by doing
these or those actions.
And here I get the result.
But in addition to this result,
I get respect
and respect.
I get
those or those labels
conflict,
non-conflict,
cooperative,
competitive.
That is,
every result,
in addition to the desired consequences,
has another consequence.
And these consequences
are also very important
for assessing me
as an effective specialist,
for being able to pay attention,
to be able to notice
not only the results of behavior,
but also the results
that are associated with it.
The third criterion
of the most effective
is verbal offense.
This concerns
only a person.
Only,
in any case,
as we know now,
we will not go into different
esoteric experiences
of language
possession.
This is only a person.
And, accordingly,
if we are talking about a person,
then
I can
verbally,
cognitively,
make up one or another
idea about my actions,
give myself an assessment,
express the level of my effectiveness
in words.
Again, this is a very significant
criterion of the most effective
is verbal offense.
Because before this,
people did not pay attention
to speech at all.
Speech for them was just
a thought spread out in the ear.
Purely a bichloral approach.
We think,
we want to convey our thoughts
to another person.
And speech is just
an articulation of our thoughts.
The situation with Bandura
changes fundamentally.
The fact that I am a professional,
that my achievements
are worthy of being
reproduced,
worthy of self-respect,
in fact,
this is a self-assessment
given to a person.
Am I successful in life?
Am I unsuccessful?
Am I successful
in perceiving the behavior of a model?
Whether I am modeling a model,
will I become
the same person
for someone else
as I am modeling
for myself today?
This is a verbal offense.
These are the cognitive and
thought structures
that are characteristic of a person.
And the fourth criterion,
again,
is not characteristic of bichlorism,
but is inherent in Bandura.
This is an emotional reinforcement.
No one has ever talked about
emotions before Bandura
in bichlorists.
It is obvious that
if a person is on an emotional rise,
if he is happy,
he is very happy.
If he achieves great results
where he would not have achieved them
in ordinary words,
if he is depressed,
if he is upset,
if something is wrong with him,
then those actions,
those reactions
that were not difficult for him
to do yesterday,
what he did on the machine,
he does not want to do it.
It is because
he is not in the mood.
A person is a living creature.
For us, this is a natural statement.
But for bichlorists
this statement was shocking.
It was emotions
that Otsun was avoiding
when creating bichlorism.
It was emotions that Bandura came to.
When creating a cognitive-bichlorian approach,
he realized
that if we want
to build a model of human behavior,
we cannot take away
from a person his subjectivity.
These are the four criteria
with which Bandura
believed
that a person
is able to objectively
assess his self-effectiveness.
So,
we have considered
the approach to the bichlorists' training.
We have looked at the changes
that were made to the bichlorian theory
by Bandura.
But let's pay attention
to the following fact.
What is the principle similarity
between Skinner
and Bandura,
the approach that is fundamentally different
from Skinner's approach?
Both of them
consider a person
as a person.
A person is one.
A person behaves in a certain way,
interacts with a person.
At the same time,
if Skinner's behavior
is related to
external activity
on a person,
Bandura
transfers the center of consideration
inside a person,
and external activity
moves from a person
to outside.
External activity can affect a person,
but the main thing is
that if a person is affected
by external activity,
then another obvious fact
related to human behavior
is left out.
The fact,
again,
in line with common sense,
is that a person
is a fundamentally social creature.
That is,
a person lives among other people,
and other people assess
a person's behavior.
A person strives to do something
in order to achieve
a certain place
in the social hierarchy
that has been created.
Any behavior of a person
is oriented to the reaction of other people.
A person is a fundamentally social creature.
Again, the idea of Aristotle,
and Aristotle also said
that a person is a social animal.
But,
it seems that
such a fact
has not yet been included
in the behaviorist's consideration.
And, in principle,
it was not important
for the behaviorists
of Skinner's logic.
Other people
were concerned with external social factors
that affect a person.
This is one of the external factors,
and there was no need
to separate them for some reason.
Bandura
approached the need
to take into account other people
almost directly.
But in this regard,
he did not take into account
the social behavior of a person.
Although, of course,
he made a lot of effort
to analyze the social behavior of a person,
but it was not the main thing for him.
As for
the inclusion
of the cognitive-behavioral approach
of the socium,
it is the merit
that is associated
with another significant figure
of the approach,
Julian Rotter.
Of course,
he was a supporter
of the idea of Bandura's approach.
They live in the same time.
But Rotter
focused his main attention
on the fact
of the social behavior
of a person
as a cognitive-behavioral creature.
At the same time,
Rotter
is the creator
of the theory of social learning.
As for
this theory,
it is again
a theory
that is in line
with the behavioral approach.
This theory reflects
the fact of the social behavior of a person
and, again,
it solves the operational task.
As for Rotter,
he states that
the meaning of the study
of human behavior
is that
we could make a forecast.
This is, again,
the basic idea of behaviorism.
We study people,
we study animals
in order to be able to predict
how they will behave.
In fact,
Bandura asks a second question.
In addition to the question
of how to behave,
Bandura asks a question
of why people behave like this.
And he starts to answer this question.
Rotter continues to look for the answer
to the question of why people behave like this.
And he says that
in addition to learning,
modeling,
observing,
which Bandura mentioned,
which is already social in itself,
the main fact is that
a person in his everyday behavior
is guided by other people.
Therefore,
our task,
the task of the cognitive behavioral approach
is to build a forecast of a person's behavior.
A forecast of a person's behavior
is the task of analyzing
the forecast of human behavior
in our everyday life.
But here it should be borne in mind
that even with regard to behaviorists,
they were very careful with words.
Our everyday life is a blurry concept.
Therefore, Rotter introduces the term
complex situation,
the forecast of human social behavior
in complex situations.
In complex situations,
from the point of view of multi-stimulant.
There are a lot of stimuli here.
First, stimuli of the external world,
and secondly,
which is much more complicated,
these are internal stimuli,
internal variables,
internal cognitive maps.
Again,
as for Rotter,
he does not stop at this idea.
He gives a way to solve it.
How can we objectively,
and this is still
a behavioral methodology.
And here the main thing is
that we need to understand
and measure,
we need to analyze,
we need to calculate.
So, the question is,
how can we measure
a complex social situation?
Rotter,
as well as Bandura,
when talking about self-effectiveness,
also highlights
four main variables.
Behaviorists have always been looking for
those variables that can be measured.
Because if I want to get
an objective result,
I need to measure it.
This is a complete analogue of natural consciousness.
Rotter highlights four variables
that need to be measured and studied
in order to solve the basic task
of building a forecast of human behavior
in complex situations.
And as for all the variables of Rotter,
these variables
are already going completely
in line with behaviorism.
Well, after Bandura,
it was partly
done simply,
because Bandura was the first
to make this subjective path.
Rotter believes
that in order to analyze
human behavior,
we need to know
the potential of its behavior.
Look,
potential is
those possible reasons,
those possible reasons
and those possible results,
those possible desires
that a person wants to achieve.
I behave,
I do something,
I act in a certain way
in order to achieve some result.
I have some faith in possibilities.
I can get one result,
I can get many results,
I can limit myself
to a small number of results.
Again,
the same question arises here.
What level of achievement,
what level of commitment
do I put in order to know
how to compare
those real achievements
that I have.
But,
since we are talking about
the potential of behavior,
Rotter introduces
the following criteria,
the following variable,
expectation.
I can set
a very high expectation
for my behavior.
And thus,
in fact,
I set my expectations,
the prospects
that I want to achieve,
the data that I want to get.
I build a certain goal,
a certain vision,
a certain belief.
I set a goal for my activity
for which
these are my internal variables
that are influenced
by external stimuli
that shape my behavior.
Expectations
determine where I am going,
what I am striving for,
what I want to achieve.
The next variable
that Rotter introduces
is the value of reinforcement.
Look,
Skinner
and Bandura
all talked about reinforcement
in different aspects.
But Rotter makes reinforcement
clearly subjective.
He does not specify
the value of reinforcement.
Why is one
or another reinforcement
valuable to a person?
Let's take a manager.
For someone,
material compensation
is the only value.
Accordingly,
everything I do is done
to increase my income.
For someone,
the value is
acquiring new knowledge,
gaining experience,
and professional growth.
Salary is important,
but the main thing for me
is getting to know a new field,
the opportunity to gain new experience,
the opportunity to gain professional growth,
which will later
be reflected in salary,
but not in salary.
The main thing is
my career and professional development.
Depending on the value
that we give to reinforcement,
there are different priorities.
Reinforcement is a choice of priorities.
What do we want to get earlier,
what do we allow to get later,
what do we not want to get at all.
Punishment.
In this regard,
Rotter, again,
makes a person even more subjective.
In this case,
the value of reinforcement
is determined not by external data,
but by the value of each person.
Then this value
will be determined
by social values.
And, again,
a social interaction will arise.
There are my values,
my internal variables.
As for potential, expectations,
values, psychology,
psychological situation
that will be the next variable,
this is a list of internal variables.
What does Rotter do?
Rotter tries to operationalize
this most inescapable,
immeasurable internal variable,
cognitive map.
This value will be related
to my internal values.
And it is related to external values.
S.
Accordingly,
depending on this ratio,
there will be different reactions.
This is the original formula.
Stimulus, internal variable, reaction.
Here it is,
the closure that arises here.
And the fourth variable
is psychological reaction.
There is a nuance
in understanding the psychological situation
for Rotter.
Let's not forget
that Rotter is a stanobichiarist.
And, accordingly,
a stanobichiarist
in the sense that
he requires objectivity.
I will not build a hypothesis,
as, for example,
domestic psychologists
from the point of view of the operational approach,
where there are only theories
and no real results.
I will not build a hypothesis.
But
every person
has his own motives.
Let's recall Bandura.
Every person has his own desires,
his own emotions.
The same Bandura.
This is the psychological situation.
There are some additional characteristics.
Not the psyche in the usual understanding
of those same cognitivists.
There are some additional
psychological characteristics.
There are some additional parameters
of my inner variable.
Desires,
emotions,
affections,
expectations,
mistakes,
needs.
This is the psychological situation.
Again,
the principle is
what can be measured,
what can be justified,
what can be assessed.
And it is not only assessed
by the person himself.
Here the rotor,
like Bandura and Skinner,
hold the same point of view.
I can think whatever I want about myself.
And, accordingly,
it is pointless to say
whether you are right or wrong.
All these variables
are given so that
I can characterize
those inner variables
that move a person
and through which
this external stimulus passes,
responsible for the behavior
that arises in a person.